---
title: June 2021 meeting notes
description: 
published: true
date: 2021-05-25T16:49:24.093Z
tags: 
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2021-05-25T16:49:24.093Z
---

# 2021-06-01

## Welcome Dhruvi!
- Dhruvi is volunteering part-time to help with design
- Previously interned at Creative Commons
- Introductions

## Design review guidelines
Please read [the wiki page](https://wiki.mathesar.org/en/design/process/review-guidelines).

## Yet another workflow update
- We have a lot to do to get to the MVP, we need to get ahead on product/design work.
    - Kriti will focus effort on converting roadmap to backlog of GitHub issues.
        - Both for design and development.
    - Aim is to help with consistent work output by allowing people to quickly work through issues and pick new ones.
        - Community contributors can also help.
- General principles for the MVP stage (and probably beyond):
    - Documentation is meant to be descriptive, not prescriptive.
        - Our aim is to write down what we need to make things easier for ourselves.
        - Avoid rabbit holes (defining/planning out too far into the future), keep focus on getting a product out.
    - Iterate, don't try to get things perfect.
        - We are trying to make something that we can put in front of users _quickly_.
        - We might have to change or throw away stuff later, that is absolutely fine.
    - Keep implementation simple.
        - Try to minimize assumptions about users, we cannot know what users want ahead of time.
        - Given two options, if both rely on assumptions about users, choose the one that's simpler to implement.
    - There are probably exceptions to these, we don't know what they are.

### Discussion
- Applicable to cursor based pagination vs. limit/offset pagination.
- Note when we make decision between different implementations so that we can make sure to architect things in a way that we can change implementations later more easily.
    - Use Engineering Decisions wiki page.
- User assumptions: things we don't know, e.g. if a user wants the ID visible or not.
    - It's not a user assumption when one option ends up with users losing data, and another doesn't. 
- Write down heuristics as we discuss them, not ahead of time.

## New Labels
See: https://github.com/centerofci/mathesar/labels

- Added prefixes to different types of labels to make usage easier.

## Retrospective

### Brent
- Finished filtering and grouping logic in data layer
- Many discussions
- PR reviews
- Reading Django docs
- Working on DB object syncing flow

### Dhruvi
- Introductory call with Ghislaine

### Eamon
- Wiki automation scripts
    -  Downloading images
    -  Organizing images
    -  Link rot detection
- Reviewed Django and Django-REST
- Setup development environment

### Ghislaine
- Pagination component specs
- Add table import feedback/review
- Discussions on pagination and naming convention for objects
- Design Review Guidelines
- Prepare first issue for Dhruvi
- Started work on Filter, Sort and Group Tables

### Kriti
- API principles: https://wiki.mathesar.org/engineering/architecture/api-standards
- Many different conversations/discussions
- Ticket creation

Time taken up by communication training, IT manager interviews, Memorial Day

### Pavish
Couldn't work much last week.
- Implemented table & tab sync with url
- Some discussions

## Upcoming Work

### Brent
- Continuing data syncing
- I'll be out tomorrow with dilated eyes until later in the day
- If time, minor performance modification w.r.t. getting records

### Dhruvi
- Getting familiar with the concepts and roadmap
- Start working on the first task (Create a Design library)

### Eamon
- Finish automation scripts (?)
    - Check for private images on public pages
    - Fix link rot detection
- Review Mathesar structure / API
- Get started on API work
    - [Table creation](https://github.com/centerofci/mathesar/issues/146)
    - [TSV Support](https://github.com/centerofci/mathesar/issues/62)

### Ghislaine
- Organize and close github design issues
- Review design wiki structure
- Design for filter, sort and group data
- Collaborate w Dhruvi on component library task

### Kriti
FYI: Reassigned table creation API & TSV file issue to Eamon

- Convert roadmap into specced out GitHub issues
- API documentation setup
- Meetings (external and internal)

Time taken up by IT manager interviews and follow up until end of next week.

### Pavish
Will not be able to allocate enough time this week as well.
- Continue working on readonly table view
    - Include import view within tab
    - Store table state of open tabs in indexedDB and link with a Read/Write store