---
title: May 2021 meeting notes
description: 
published: true
date: 2021-05-03T17:10:58.210Z
tags: 
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2021-05-03T17:08:39.037Z
---

# 2021-05-10
## Ghislaine's Design Process
(Ghislaine shared Miro board via screenshare)

The process is documented on the wiki: https://wiki.mathesar.org/design/process

### Steps
- Discovery
- Definition
- Design
    - Design problem framing
    - Point of view, goals, constraints
    - Explore possibilities
    - Prototyping
    - Testing
- Development

### Explanation
- Kriti & Brent did discovery and definition before Ghislaine joined, Ghislaine had to do some of her own work on this.
- "Definition" is our product roadmap

### Discussion
- We don't want to go in circles on definition, we should take our product roadmap as our strategy for now
- We shouldn't be adding things to the roadmap, but we'll need to clarify or remove certain things.
- We'll review the roadmap before next time to make sure essential architectural things are on it:
    - e.g. undo functionality, localization

## Design Principles & Closing Design Issues
- Ghislaine has rough notes that she's still organizing
- Principles are a manual for making decisions so that the designer doesn't have to be involved in every decision
- Two different targets for design:
    - Process-oriented: Enabling community & co-creation
    - Result-oriented: Users accept product features, and we can measure acceptance.
- We design for impact and for implementation (not research and discovery and pushing boundaries, at this point)
- Competing options - we decide based on something that's implementable sooner and have the optimal impact on the users
    - e.g. increased effort for users has a big impact (may not be positive)

### Principles draft
- Change plan if circumstances change
- Sufficient documentation to justify design decisions
- Shared sense of ownership on design
- Anticipate effects of project results on the user (we might not be right, but we try)
- Communication methods increase mutual understanding but do not delay work
- Regular contact with key stakeholders of the project
- Make invisible work visible to the user to build and maintain trust
- The work and how to do it is based on knowledge, not belief

### Discussion
- It's important to facilitate users becoming developers, so integrating both process and result is essential
    - We can try to help users create the results they want through their own development
- Having a design system will be helpful so that developers don't have to worry about design, and design system changes can be handled separately

## Upcoming Features
What's next after read only tables?
- Table creation from file import
- Records editing (DML)
- Table manipulation (DDL)

TODO: Kriti to add DDL and DML to wiki

## Last week retrospective
### Pavish
* Tickets and implementation for client routing takeover. See current PR.
* PR raised also:
    * includes changes for npm dependency reinstall on starting containers (based on our discussion in Matrix channel)
    * moves existing front-end to svelte
    * loads pre-rendered data for implemented routes + through API on second visit
    * handles scss preprocessing

### Kriti
* Mainly wiki updates, took longer than expected.
* Some API work 
    * finished records API
    * updates to schema API (to unblock Pavish)
    * database keys API (to unblock Pavish)
* Licensed Mathesar under GPL.

### Brent
* Finished testing of old prototype code
* Got into types.
    * Implementation of type casting:  Quick, easy (maybe 80 LOC)
    * Testing of type casting: Complex, and raises a number of questions (ongoing)
    * Overall, the main difficulty is mostly UX concerns; the implementations are generally easy.

### Ghislaine
* Wireframes and UI exploration.
* Created issues for design tasks.
* Started draft for UX principles, but wanted to experiment a bit with the process before moving forward
* Defined initial UI design in Figma.
* Wiki updates. 

## This week's plan
General plan is to focus on layout and read-only table view, and if no work is needed on that front, focus on supporting upcoming features decided above (probably file import).
 * Question (from Brent):  Is there any support needed in the DB that doesn't currently exist? 
     * No, but types support the upcoming import flow

### Pavish
* Create tickets and work on reusable components required for UI, without finalized css
    * Textbox (text, password, number, email)
    * Buttons
    * Checkbox, Radio
    * File drag & drop import
    * If I get time,
        * custom select box (has the most work - thinking of importing code from one of my open-source projects: select-madu)
* Discuss and decide on table view read-only UI
* Will not be available during usual working hours on Tuesday and Wednesday, since I have conflicting meetings with my current job

### Brent
* Continue with types, unless there's something more pressing (it's not really related to the week goal, so I can flex if needed)
* Specifically, I want to bring some precision to the mapping between the types in the roadmap and implementation, and make sure we're on the same page for each and every one.
    * (Note from Kriti: that would be great)
* Finish type casting (it's actually done, but the previous applies)
* Move on to type inference (easy once we've made all necessary decisions about each type implementation)

### Kriti
* Sync DB and webapp if DB changes out from under webapp
* API updates needed for read-only table view
* File import API
* Set up some more infrastructure for Mathesar (wiki update bot, GitHub bot)
    * might need separate Matrix server
* If I have time, handle TSV file imports (I might work with Joi on this if he's interested)
    * (note from Brent:  If you switch to using the `psycopg2.copy_expert` (which I recommend), this will be extremely easy)

I'll be spending some time on hiring IT support for CCI.

### Ghislaine
* Finalize first version of design process (diagrams, additional activity details)
* Complete UI for read-only tables
* Present UX principles and add first draft to wiki

## Read-Only Tables
What decisions do we need to make in order to design and develop read-only tables?
- How users locate tables
    - Sidebar navigation
    - Naming tables
    - Bookmark
    - Recent
    - Search across table
- How users prepare tables
    - Opening a table to read
    - Browsing table content
    - Verify record count (basic table stats)
    - Finding a table record location
    - View options/pagination
    - Save query (AWS Athena)
- How user confirms table content
    - Real time editing / data accuracy
    - Is it updated?
- How user executes table reading
    - Filtering?
    - Sorting
- How user modifies table reading
    - Open another table

### Questions from Engineering
- How do we handle an existing database with thousands of tables or schemas in the sidebar?
- How do we handle a table with hundreds of thousands of records?

### Discussion
- AWS Athena as an example
    - Left pane has your tables
    - You can create tabs for different queries (on any tables or combinations of tables from the left pane)
    - You can run the queries
    - When you change tabs, the results change to match the displayed query.
    - You can save a query so that you can close a tab, and get back to it (it reopens in an editable state)
    - Tabs from last time are still open when you log back into the account.

# 2021-05-07
## Wiki restructure walkthrough
- New Product section
    - new Concepts page
- New Engineering section
- Community & Meeting Notes section moved to the root

### Wiki purpose
- Spending time on the wiki now to set up structure
- We should all get into the habit of updating the wiki/documentation regularly, to make it accessible for future contributors / onboarding

### Wiki updates review process
- We want to keep review process minimal, since we'll be updating the wiki frequently
- Major wiki changes should be reported in code review channel and appropriate people tagged
    - Use your discretion

### Future ideas
- Blog hosted on the wiki (can post to Hacker News, etc.)
    - Blog post page type is on the wiki.js roadmap

### Keeping the wiki up to date
How do we make sure the wiki stays up to date?
- Wiki should not need to stay in sync with the code, it should be for higher level documents/specs
- We should update wiki when:
    - Designing new features
    - Concluding GitHub discussions
    - Making major technical decisions
- Previously, wiki was used for things that belonged more in GitHub discussions, so that caused it to go out of date quickly
- Kriti will keep an eye on making sure the wiki is up to date
- We should figure out how to post wiki updates to Matrix

## Figma designs
(Ghislaine demoed Figma designs)
- Designs are exploratory but general feedback is welcome
- Icons should always be accompanied by labels
- Lots of questions coming up, decisions need to be made
- Going simple on UI design
- Icons are Noun Project

### Questions and Discussion
- What does the pagination look like?
- Header, etc. should be sticky
- Are views in Mathesar separate from database views?
    - Mathesar views are backed by database views
    - Are forms views?
    - Are calendars views?
    - Maybe forms and calendars should be different from views
        - Can make the decision later
- Will we support sorting, grouping, etc. on Tables?
    - Yes, but if you want to save it, then it'll be made into a View
- Will we show the ID in the record view?
    - Yes

### Ideas
- Pinning columns would be good to help users identify important columns
- Can we get back to the record you were editing if you open a record form and go back to the record view?
    - It's doable

### Next steps
- We'll start with designing the general layout and read-only table
    - Pavish & Ghislaine will make a list of what decisions block this from their end
- We'll also decide on Monday what we'll work on after the read-only view so we can start planning on decisions that need to happen on backend/design front

## Local Development
- Image is constructed after package install
    - typical for prod
    - requires rebuilding when new packages are installed
    - Could do the installation in docker-compose
- Improve documentation ASAP
- Will continue discussion async

# 2021-05-05
## Internship update
- Eamon is now starting on May 24.

## Hand-off design to development

### Questions
- What does design need to consider as part of the hand-off to development process? 
- How does the implementation planning process look like for design solutions? 
- How do we test and refine design solutions as part of this process? 

### Discussion
- Waiting on the entire design to be done before starting frontend developmment seems like overkill
- Pavish and Ghislaine can work in parallel
    - e.g. Pavish can start on the basic table structure while Ghislaine is defining more complex interactions
- There will always be iterative changes even after a module is developed
- There should be design review meetings to catch small issues (like selecting multiple options instead one)
    - Design reviews will be all four of us, since it impacts the backend
    - We'll use existing Mathesar check-in meetings for design reviews, it will be an agenda item
    - Ghislaine will post the link to the Figma project beforehand
- Review meetings should take care of testing/refining desigh solutions
    - Once we see it live, there will be some refinements noticed that will involve additional issues being created.

## Staging environment
- We should set up a staging environment with real data
    - Consider the team using Mathesar to keep track of project related information
        - User interview ideas
        - Non-code related todos
    - Have a large (millions of rows) database stored on staging so we can identify issues
    - Set it up on RDS or GCP equivalent so that we can make sure it works
- It would be good for all of us to have our own private instances of Mathesar as well that we use regularly

## Design Prototyping Sandbox
What environment can we create so that design interactions can be built and experienced as prototypes by the team or internal/external stakeholders.
- Would be good for Ghislaine to have access to our components so that she can design with HTML
    - Single source of truth for all styles
- Ghislaine would be building static HTML files with some javascript from existing components, there's no need to edit existing files on production
- Potential solutions
    - We could have a Storybook for components, but it wouldn't work for entire application pages
    - Ghislaine could download latest CSS from client builds

Solution: for now, just download latest CSS and apply to local HTML files
- Pavish can help Ghislaine set up a local development environment when ready

Ghislaine will match CSS class names to Figma components.

## Design Principles & Closing Design Issues
- Ghislaine is working on these on parallel with Figma designs
- We'll discuss on Friday

## Mathesar Philosophy

### Exposing DB Structure via Object View of Data
- Databases are different from spreadsheets because they're actually _less_ table oriented
    - Fundamental structure is record, everything is relationship between records
    - Tabular view is useful for some things, but is limited
- Just because databases have tables, doesn't mean we should only be focused on tables or everything needs to be a table
    - Eventually we will be able to handle non-rectangular data, Postgres can do that
- Table is the default view, but we'll support kanban, cards, calendar etc.
- Ghislaine will share paper on spreadsheet vs. record design from MIT
    - We need a record view

### Plugins
- People should be able to build their own views and types as plugins, probably more
    - Maybe aggregations or groupings, other types of data manipulations
- Too early to discuss plugin architecture in any detail
- Mathesar is a "swiss army knife" for data, people should be able to build their own set of tools, not just have a pre-configured set of tools
- We should handle reflection really well etc. to make Mathesar useful for power users 

## Routing
(Pavish demoed local Svelte-rendered Mathesar for CSV upload form)
- Currently working on table view
- Routing is handled client-side
- Need API for database name and table names in schemas
    - Kriti will work on this today
- Discussed best way to render JSON data in the Django template
    - We will switch to using serializers to get data and pass it to the template via context
    - this will also ensure that the format matches the API and allows consistency when working with the API

## Design section on wiki
(Kriti demoed work on Design section on wiki)
- Ghislaine will update wiki later with Design Principles & Design Process

# 2021-05-03

## Meetings
- Meetings are three times a week now
- We should continue to use Mondays for planning the week out + any discussion.
- Wednesdays and Fridays should be for general updates/discussion/talking through problems. ideally, we'll have an agenda in advance (nothing formal, but someone should have a topic they want to talk about or brainstorm/bounce ideas off of people) and cancel the meeting if there's nothing to talk about.
   - We're not going to cancel any meetings next week, just to see how it goes.
- We have to use the full hour, we'll end early if we're done with discussion.
- The plan is to have fewer meetings in the long term, doing things asynchronously is better for community involvement, documentation, etc.
    - It's important to have more meetings at this stage until we all fully grok the project and get to know each other better.

## Last week retrospective

### Pavish
- Set up frontend development environment and workflow - everything needed to get started with frontend
- Documentation - only updated README, see currently open PR
- Kicked off discussions for production build and E2E integration tests
    - Too early for this right now, but we should keep it in mind

### Ghislaine
- A round of wireframes for data exploration, discussions with Kriti
    - Research revealed that BI platform vs. web analytics etc. all solve similar problems differently
    - Went back to Dabble DB to look at it again with more information about what's under the hood for us
        - e.g. they don't have "tables", we want to expose more of the DB structure
        - they made different layout decisions
- Created a document: [Initial Research and Wireframing Conclusions](https://hackmd.io/@mathesar/SkyvIqKDu)

### Brent
- Moved stuff over from the prototype repo to main repo
    - Prototype used SQLAlchemy 1.3, current repo uses 1.4, which implements the "2.0 API" and deprecates a bunch of things
    - Took a while to port over, especially `copy` method, which was deprecated for being non-deterministic/imprecise, leading to unexpected behavior
        - We had to implement our own `copy` method in a simplified Mathesar Column class
- Ticketing
- Discussions
    - e.g. function signatures - Kriti & Brent were using different types of signatures, and needed to get in sync
- Moving over stuff from the prototype is done, except for Jupyter notebook and random table creation, which will not be moved over
- Put together demo for Ghislaine and Pavish
- A bunch of bug fixes

### Kriti
- Worked mainly on the API
    - Mostly done
        - CRUD on records (no PUT (not necessary))
        - Read-only on schemas and records
- Did work on testing
    - Django
    - CSV uploading
    - API
- GH actions to run tests on PRs
- Simplified Issue templates a bit
- Meetings, 1:1s, planning, licensing discussions

## This week's plan

### Pavish
- Implement routing on client (take over from server after intial page load)
- Table view using Svelte

### Ghislaine
- Learned enough from the wireframing process, we can go higher-fidelity
- Will work on creating UI for inventory use case in Figma
    - No design system yet, since it'll just slow things down
- User will be working with views
- Write down Mathesar principles to make decisions
    - Talk about how to close design issues

### Brent
- Writing tests for last week's functionality
- Types and type inference

### Kriti
- Update wiki, roadmap, usecases & concepts. Better documentation.
- Sync webapp and db tables
- GPL for Mathesar
- Update CSV import to save CSV file
- API for CSV import
    - One API for uploading CSV
    - One API for showing 10-20 lines of CSV
    - Status of CSV upload
    - API to actually create table
- If time permits, allow TSV import (to be co-ordinated with Brent)

## Community readiness check-in
- License
    - GPL
- Roadmap
    - Kriti to update wiki
- Tickets
    - Still a few weeks away from making publicly contributable tickets

## Other Discussion

### URL Routing
- Routes might need to be duplicated in both backend (Django URLs) and frontend, since we need to handle routing from both places depending on whether the user is already in the application

### Exposing DB Structure vs. Object View of Data
- Not mutually exclusive to expose DB structure and let people work in different views
- Discussion will continue async

### CSV Uploads & Type Inference
- Current workflow is to upload a CSV file directly, we want to change it to store the CSV file, show 20-30 lines to the user, infer types, allow users to change types, and then create the table.
    - Type inference should be in the database, not Python so the fastest way to infer is to make a table full of strings first.
- Type inference - public function signatures
    - Infer a type for a column
    - Infer types for columns of an entire table
    - Automated flow --> upon upload, show types to the user
- Discussion will continue async

### Closing Design Issues
- How to close design issues on GitHub? What needs to be done?
- Discussion will continue async

### Matrix-related Discussions
- Tech discussions should happen in the Mathesar public channel where possible.
- Set up a separate code review channel for PR review requests.
- Mittens says "miaow"
