---
title: May 2021 meeting notes
description: 
published: true
date: 2021-05-03T17:10:58.210Z
tags: 
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2021-05-03T17:08:39.037Z
---

# 2021-05-03

## Meetings
- Meetings are three times a week now
- We should continue to use Mondays for planning the week out + any discussion.
- Wednesdays and Fridays should be for general updates/discussion/talking through problems. ideally, we'll have an agenda in advance (nothing formal, but someone should have a topic they want to talk about or brainstorm/bounce ideas off of people) and cancel the meeting if there's nothing to talk about.
   - We're not going to cancel any meetings next week, just to see how it goes.
- We have to use the full hour, we'll end early if we're done with discussion.
- The plan is to have fewer meetings in the long term, doing things asynchronously is better for community involvement, documentation, etc.
    - It's important to have more meetings at this stage until we all fully grok the project and get to know each other better.

## Last week retrospective

### Pavish
- Set up frontend development environment and workflow - everything needed to get started with frontend
- Documentation - only updated README, see currently open PR
- Kicked off discussions for production build and E2E integration tests
    - Too early for this right now, but we should keep it in mind

### Ghislaine
- A round of wireframes for data exploration, discussions with Kriti
    - Research revealed that BI platform vs. web analytics etc. all solve similar problems differently
    - Went back to Dabble DB to look at it again with more information about what's under the hood for us
        - e.g. they don't have "tables", we want to expose more of the DB structure
        - they made different layout decisions
- Created a document: [Initial Research and Wireframing Conclusions](https://hackmd.io/@mathesar/SkyvIqKDu)

### Brent
- Moved stuff over from the prototype repo to main repo
    - Prototype used SQLAlchemy 1.3, current repo uses 1.4, which implements the "2.0 API" and deprecates a bunch of things
    - Took a while to port over, especially `copy` method, which was deprecated for being non-deterministic/imprecise, leading to unexpected behavior
        - We had to implement our own `copy` method in a simplified Mathesar Column class
- Ticketing
- Discussions
    - e.g. function signatures - Kriti & Brent were using different types of signatures, and needed to get in sync
- Moving over stuff from the prototype is done, except for Jupyter notebook and random table creation, which will not be moved over
- Put together demo for Ghislaine and Pavish
- A bunch of bug fixes

### Kriti
- Worked mainly on the API
    - Mostly done
        - CRUD on records (no PUT (not necessary))
        - Read-only on schemas and records
- Did work on testing
    - Django
    - CSV uploading
    - API
- GH actions to run tests on PRs
- Simplified Issue templates a bit
- Meetings, 1:1s, planning, licensing discussions

## This week's plan

### Pavish
- Implement routing on client (take over from server after intial page load)
- Table view using Svelte

### Ghislaine
- Learned enough from the wireframing process, we can go higher-fidelity
- Will work on creating UI for inventory use case in Figma
    - No design system yet, since it'll just slow things down
- User will be working with views
- Write down Mathesar principles to make decisions
    - Talk about how to close design issues

### Brent
- Writing tests for last week's functionality
- Types and type inference

### Kriti
- Update wiki, roadmap, usecases & concepts. Better documentation.
- Sync webapp and db tables
- GPL for Mathesar
- Update CSV import to save CSV file
- API for CSV import
    - One API for uploading CSV
    - One API for showing 10-20 lines of CSV
    - Status of CSV upload
    - API to actually create table
- If time permits, allow TSV import (to be co-ordinated with Brent)

## Community readiness check-in
- License
    - GPL
- Roadmap
    - Kriti to update wiki
- Tickets
    - Still a few weeks away from making publicly contributable tickets

## Other Discussion

### URL Routing
- Routes might need to be duplicated in both backend (Django URLs) and frontend, since we need to handle routing from both places depending on whether the user is already in the application

### Exposing DB Structure vs. Object View of Data
- Not mutually exclusive to expose DB structure and let people work in different views
- Discussion will continue async

### CSV Uploads & Type Inference
- Current workflow is to upload a CSV file directly, we want to change it to store the CSV file, show 20-30 lines to the user, infer types, allow users to change types, and then create the table.
    - Type inference should be in the database, not Python so the fastest way to infer is to make a table full of strings first.
- Type inference - public function signatures
    - Infer a type for a column
    - Infer types for columns of an entire table
    - Automated flow --> upon upload, show types to the user
- Discussion will continue async

### Closing Design Issues
- How to close design issues on GitHub? What needs to be done?
- Discussion will continue async

### Matrix-related Discussions
- Tech discussions should happen in the Mathesar public channel where possible.
- Set up a separate code review channel for PR review requests.
- Mittens says "miaow"
